---
layout: post
date: 2023-08-21 09:00:00 +00:00
title: Summer activities in Agama and ALP
description: A new version of our future installer is out, able to install ALP Dolomite previews
permalink: blog/2023-08-21/agama3
tags:
- Project
- Programming
- Systems Management
- YaST
- D-Installer
- Agama
---

After almost five months without blogging we are back to confirm the YaST Team is still alive and
kicking! Among many other things, we have been working lately on several internal aspects of Agama,
the project previously known as D-Installer. And since SUSE is publishing an early preview of the
first ALP-based product that will be released next year, we decided it was time to put a new version
of Agama out, so you can use it to take a look to ALP Dolomite from a different angle.

## Background {#background}

In case you already got lost, let us give you some context.

**What is ALP?** The SUSE Adaptable Linux Platform is the base for future operating systems developed
by SUSE.

**What is SUSE ALP Dolomite?** It's the codename of what will be the first operating system based on
ALP. It's intended to be a minimal OS where software is managed in transactions and applications are
containerized. So it will be close in spirit to SLE Micro. ALP Dolomite Milestone3 (the latest
preview version) is available as a set of bootable images you can just grab, boot and enjoy. Unless
you have any reason to prefer a "classical" installation process. That's where Agama comes into
play.

**What about Agama?** As you hopefully already know, it's a new Linux installer that re-uses many of
the YaST internals but offers a more modern web-based user interface and mechanisms for third-party
integration. When finished (is still under heavy development) it will be able to install many
operating systems like openSUSE Tumbleweed or ALP-based systems. If you need more details, you can
(re)-watch out presentation from the recent openSUSE Conference 2023.

**And D-Installer?** Is just the previous name of Agama. No mysteries here.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Ey7BPFggtns" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Getting the Testing Live ISO {#download}

As mentioned, it has been more than four months since the [announcement of Agama
0.8]({{site.baseurl}}/blog/2023-03-30/d-installer-0-8). It was still called D-Installer back then!
Although we follow a continuous delivery process in which you can always try the daily changes, we
decided it was time to publish and announce a new version. And after D-Installer 0.8 it comes...
Agama 3! :wink: As you can see we decided to change the versioning schema and go for a plain single
number: 1, 2, 3, etc. However, if we need to release a hot-fix we might use a dotted version like
3.1.

You can get a glance at Agama 3 by downloading any of the two flavors (openSUSE and ALP) of the
[Agama testing
ISO](https://download.opensuse.org/repositories/systemsmanagement:/Agama:/Devel/images/iso/). Feel
free to ignore the "Playwright" variants unless you are interested in automated testing.

Remember those ISO images are not intended as the final installation media for future releases of
openSUSE or ALP-based operating systems, but only as a vehicle to check the current status of Agama.

The main goal of the openSUSE flavor is to test the installation of openSUSE Tumbleweed, although it
can also be used to install a very early prototype of a future Leap distribution based on ALP.
The ALP flavor allows to install the prototype of ALP Dolomite (Milestone3 at the time of writing,
so not even a beta version yet).

## What's New {#news}

There are several differences in Agama 3, when compared with versions previously announced or
showed at conferences.

The first thing you will notice is that the images are available in four different architectures:
`x86_64`, `aarch64`, `s390x` and `ppc64le`. And that's actually the first news, since D-Installer
0.8 didn't come with a PowerPC version.

Regarding the usage, there are some visible changes in the storage section, with a more informative
screen to select the target device, a better overview of the file systems that will be created and
the possibility to adjust the sizes of those partitions or LVM logical volumes.

{% include blog_img.md src="disk-mini.png" full_img="disk.png" attr='style="float: left;"' %}
{% include blog_img.md src="size-mini.png" full_img="size.png" attr='style="float: right;"' %}
{% include blog_img.md src="storage-mini.png" full_img="storage.png" %}

Also related to the selection of target devices, now it's possible to interactively
[configure zFCP devices](https://github.com/openSUSE/agama/pull/634), in addition to the options
to configure DASD and iSCSI that were already available in previous versions of Agama.

Error reporting in the web interface has also improved, including the new page to summarize all
found issues that is described on [this pull request](https://github.com/openSUSE/agama/pull/540).

The command line interface also received several enhancement with better [error
reporting](https://github.com/openSUSE/agama/pull/659) and improved visualization of the
[installation progress](https://github.com/openSUSE/agama/pull/653). Not to mention the possibility
of configuring the network from the command line and during unattended installation, something
that was in the past only possible using the web interface.

Last but not least, there are many changes under the hood that result in a slightly lower memory
consumption and better logging of the D-Bus service, which helps to debug errors reported by our
much appreciated early adopters. We even got some nice contributions to improve the internals of the
web interface. Thanks [Balsa](https://github.com/balsa-asanovic)!

## More to come {#future}

We keep working to improve Agama on several areas, as our other duties and responsibilities permit.
We hope to have news soon about internationalization support and improvements in both unattended
installation and storage configuration.

Meanwhile we appreciate all opinions and feedback. As always, you can reach the YaST Team at the
[YaST Development mailing
list](https://lists.opensuse.org/archives/list/yast-devel@lists.opensuse.org/) and our `#yast`
channel at [Libera.chat](https://libera.chat/). Have a lot of fun!
